What's land reform? You always hear the
people debating economics like oh they
they instituted land reform this is
really important this one else is and
then actually land reform was not that
what is land reform?
>> Yeah I I've got a chapter on this in the
book and it was a sort of towards the
end of it quite carefully worded so not
upset the people that feel very strongly
about land [laughter] reform. Um land
reform Things you don't talk about on
Twitter yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. L a poss l
asterisk l and and nd reform so the bots
don't attack you.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. [music] I'm Tracy
Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe
we've talked before in reference [music]
to I think it was the US real estate
market right?
>> Yeah.
There seems to be this weird thing going
on with housing where it feels like
policy makers or maybe people even are
not sure what exactly they want it to be
right? Is it supposed to be
this social good this affordable thing
we all can live somewhere that we can
you know preferably a place we want to
live in something that we can afford or
is it effectively a giant piggy bank
>> Yeah. an investment vehicle in which
case we would expect prices to always
keep going up. Yeah right. This is I
mean the dream like what I my personal
preference
is for housing to be very affordable
very briefly and then that time that I
buy a house buy accumulate more housing
and then it stops being affordable.
That's my Many people have different
tastes. I just want a very brief period
of housing.
>> is this is another thing about housing.
>> that in that brief period I don't lose
my job. It's very very important that in
my that brief period my other
investments don't go down. I just want a
very brief period of housing affordable.
But this is another thing about housing
which is like historically it is one of
the few ladders to big wealth for the
masses right? We've all heard the
stories about artists in Soho buying a
loft for like $500 and now it's worth 10
million so Correct. Good good for them.
The other thing that's interesting about
housing particularly when it comes to
affordability is that this seems to be a
truly global challenge so people have
lots of theories like oh it's cuz they
didn't allow zoning in San Francisco or
whatever and it's like maybe well like I
think any question about housing
affordability has to wrestle at the fact
that um this is a really global
phenomenon so can't be some
idiosyncratic thing. It does seem as
though places where housing is l
more affordable do not have particularly
dynamic economies so it's like I know
the people are like oh Japan oh look how
cheap Tokyo is it's like a yummy success
story but like they had a massive bubble
and it's been deflating ever since and
it's not like Japan is at like some
cutting edge of particularly any booming
industries and its population is
shrinking.
>> still pretty nice to live
>> it's very nice. I'm not saying otherwise
it's just not clearly not where the
action is. I'd love to go to Japan she
was like one of the nice places and the
other thing that's interesting about
this which is that they're all kinds of
ills that sort of bedevil particularly
the rich world these days
and then we look at China it's like oh
they have it all figured out. It seems
like housing is a mess in China too. One
of these rare congrat like sort of like
moments where we can shake hands with
China is like yeah we're dealing with a
lot of the same issues. Well here's the
thing China is like the ultimate example
of that tension between investment asset
and social good right? Because even in
China as you point out there are
affordability issues and every once in a
while you see policy makers try to put
limits on house prices in like really
expensive cities
>> Yeah. but then when they start doing
stuff that like actually pops housing
prices everyone starts protesting which
is kind you know a rare thing in China.
So that is the tension. I also find real
estate speculation in China to be kind
of I thought they were communists and I
mean that unironically like where did
communists get the idea of real estate
speculation?
>> this is another thing because the social
net starts going away in like the 1990s
and so people have to do something with
their money to have retirement income to
you know
>> the houses in the old days used to be
owned by the companies they were
dormitories and then when that started
split apart I don't know. Maybe our
guest knows more.
>> Yeah so we do in fact have the perfect
guest.
>> The perfect guest.
>> Yes we are going to be speaking with
Mike Bird. He is of course the Wall
Street editor over at the Economist and
the author of the new book all about
this called The Land Trap a new history
of the world's oldest asset. So welcome
to the show Mike. Thank you very much
for having me. Great to be here.
I love Mike we both love Mike so we're
excited to have him on the show.
>> who spent some time in Asia and I was
there in Hong Kong as well so knows the
sort of global history of land and I was
reading your book and you go all the way
back to like Babylon or Sumeria so very
impressive. So why did you decide to
look at land? It's a great question.
Um
I guess it started
I started my career in London and
there's a huge thing in London about
like housing as there is here
you know people's lack of ability to
afford it. I think it's even even worse
in the UK than the US because you know
the the culture of equity investing and
all sorts of other things is so much
weaker. Um but I guess I I really got
into it when I moved to Hong Kong um
because Hong Kong felt like London on
steroids. The housing was even more
expensive. It was part of you know I
moved in 2018 you there Tracy it was
like the extraordinary bull run like the
absolute peak of the post 2008 surge in
Hong Kong
and learning about how land was really
expensive but also the government owned
all the land and leased the land out and
made money from the land. I found that
very confusing and it helped me to sort
of dig into things and I think it helped
me to
come up like start thinking about this
is like a framework of of how land works
in different places and how you can use
it and abuse it and and whatever um and
yeah Hong Kong was a great place to
think about that cuz it's such a
example story of how bad things can get
you know So if you buy property in Hong
Kong what exactly are you buying? You
are buying like you're buying an
apartment right? But you don't own the
land. So if yeah say you're a real
estate developer right? You you buy a a
land lease from the government like a 75
year 99 year land lease that they
they've clipped back and extended the
the terms of the lease over time but
yeah that's what you're buying you're
buying the right to use it for a certain
amount of time.
Does it ever just go away like other
examples like you know what 75 years is
up now your land is gone?
>> problem this is a big problem and in
these places in places like Hong Kong
and Singapore you know there is
the difficulty of when lots of the land
starts to roll over when lots of the
leases start to get the end the question
of whether you just bow to political
pressure and just give it to people
right? Just let people keep it or
whether you kick them off and start
again whether you knock something down
and rebuild it's a big difficult issue
yeah. Mozambique is the other country I
know that does this which is kind of
funny um also communist history there.
Anyway
what role does housing actually play in
the Chinese economy?
So I think the the best part of living
in Hong Kong was learning how this
relates to Hong Kong right? So
put in very simple terms the 1980s
Chairman Mao is dead
Deng Xiaoping
consolidating power and you're in a
strange position where you have to start
or Deng wants to start bringing in
market forces into the economy but it's
pretty dangerous he's got a lot of
political opponents you've got to step
pretty slowly
and housing is one of the areas that's
most difficult. China's housing at the
time is pretty ramshackle and terrible.
It's attached as Joe suggested at the
beginning to like the industrial base
like your employer houses you on a on a
farm or next to a factory or wherever it
is but what China needs is urban modern
residential housing.
So
who's the the premier of China
later on and he's one of the the sort of
peak reformers in Deng's China
he credits this to a conversation with a
Hong Kong real estate developer called
Henry Fok who said
in a conversation with him where where
Zhao was explaining like the difficulty
of oh we don't have any money and we
can't get foreign investment in
and and Henry Fok said but if you have
land why why don't you have money? How
can you not have money?
And basically they started adopting on a
small scale initially the the Hong Kong
system. They started leasing out land to
make money. First one of these is in
Shenzhen in December 1987 there's an
auction the Hong Kong government gives
them a gavel to to do the auction.
They're auctioning off a pretty small
piece of land but this is a symbolic
thing because you know it's a communist
country and the Chinese government owns
all the land. They hadn't even at this
point changed the constitution to make
this legal they're sort of experimenting
just at the edge and then slowly this
becomes the main financing model there's
a big tax change in the middle of the
1990s that shifts this but it's it's a
really good way of making money
especially if you're the government and
you own all the land. China owns that in
in the mainland for for communist
reasons but it's actually a handover to
some degree from from Hong Kong.
Actually can I back up a few decades?
What's land reform? You always hear the
people debating economics like oh they
they instituted land reform and this is
really important this one else is and
then actually land reform was not that
what is land reform?
>> Yeah I I've got a chapter on this in the
book and it was a sort of towards the
end of it quite carefully worded so not
upset the people that feel very strongly
about [laughter] land reform.
Land reform Things you don't talk about
on Twitter yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. L a
poss l asterisk l and and nd reform so
the bots don't attack you.
>> The land reform is mostly middle of the
20th century phenomenon
and and it's basically there was a lot
of economic thinking at the time.
There's a guy called
Wolf Ladejinsky who was a US Department
of Agriculture employee he was an
economist and he was an an
about land reform which is essentially
is redistributing really concentrated
ownership of land to larger numbers of
people, especially in the the developing
rural world. We're not talking about
like, you know, cities or anything here.
Um and he went into Japan after World
War II, a bunch of other reformers
basically
forced the the Japanese government at
the time to pass a land reform bill,
which redistributed an enormous amount
of Japan's agricultural land. This
happens in Taiwan as well. It happens in
South Korea. And there's a huge amount
of attempts to do it elsewhere to
varying degrees across Asia and other
parts of the world. Basically, it's by
far the most successful in those three
original countries. They try in India,
it doesn't work. They try in Vietnam at
South Vietnam, it doesn't really work,
you know. I think one of the most
depressing recurring themes on this
podcast, etc., is the number of times
there is some like sort of very
successful project in industrialization
or economic development, and then at the
end there's disasters, but it's only
ever worked in three like East
[laughter] Asian countries, and we have
no evidence that any of this works
anywhere else. So now we have Now we
have another one today.
>> that you cannot use. Yeah. [laughter]
Um okay, well, the other thing about
land in China, and again, we're sort of
fast forwarding um back to the '90s. And
we should talk about the hukou system as
well later on. But
land has this really unique position, I
guess, culturally, socially, and
financially for Chinese people, right?
Like everyone basically decides they
want to be a landlord. They want to own
an apartment even if it's not built. You
see the ads in like newspapers, flyers,
things like that, in a way that you you
don't necessarily see them for stocks or
bonds, right? Totally. Um I think
there's a big cultural thing there. I'm
I'm never
I'm never too sure whether I'm like a
culture is downstream of policy or
policy is downstream of culture guy.
Fair. But there clearly is a big
cultural impulse there. Um whatever it's
driven by. I remember when I lived in
Hong Kong, obviously not mainland China,
but you used to get adverts pushed
through your door, and they'd be like,
invest in the northern English Riviera,
right? There's this housing in Leeds and
Bradford to be bought, investment
properties. This is a big thing. You
didn't get those in Leeds and Bradford,
right? If you live in the UK, [laughter]
you don't get those adverts. So yeah,
it's a it's a big cultural thing. It's
also a big thing in the mainland, I
think, because of um financial
repression. Basically, you can't invest
long-term in the equity market in China,
right? It's a it's a sideways game. Um
it's a terrible way of compounding
wealth. Um bank accounts in general in
China for a very long period of its
modern history had like near a real
negative returns um because of financial
repression. So the question is, if
you're saving a lot of money, where do
you put it? Um and there's only really
been one answer. It's been a completely
rational thing for Chinese households to
do that. Um you know, extremely high
saving households buying property after
property. A lot of them left vacant. One
of the things I say in the book is that
China has the the symptoms of both a
housing shortage and a housing glut,
right? It manages to get the worst of
both worlds.
Joe, you know what I call this? What?
China's great ball of money. Yeah,
that's right. That's a
>> the country from asset class to asset
class. So okay, the stock market hasn't
done well for a very long time. Rates on
savings are very low. How did like
Chinese leaders feel [snorts] about this
emergence of a very speculative,
high-growth, high-return, at least
during the good old days, before a few
years ago, about the emergence of this
industry, about this emergence of this
sort of
thing that's crucial for living,
and also becoming a major speculative
vehicle. Houses are for living, not for
speculation, as some people say. Um
yeah, it's a I mean, I I should say it's
an incredibly useful way of building out
a city. This This tool is like super
powerful if you're just starting out,
and no one wants to invest. It's a
really good way of pairing real estate
development with infrastructure. You can
pay for a lot of things. You can do it
sort of expanding very, very rapidly.
Plus you boost other sectors, right?
Construction, manufacturing.
>> buildout, right? Um you don't
Yeah, you don't have to do that much
administration. It's fairly It's fairly
easy to do this stuff, right? Um so
there's lots of advantages to it. I
think people start to see the problems
even at the level of the central Chinese
government in the sort of early 2010s,
right? And you get this series of like
whack-a-mole attempts to get the big
ball of money, the big ball of credit,
out of the system. So the first thing
you see is the Chinese leadership
saying, okay, banks, limits on real
estate lending to developers, right?
Which is what pushes them into the
international bond markets, where most
of the the Chinese property developers
fund themselves. Then you see the limits
on
borrowing from the bond market, which
sort of come in and out during the
2010s, and eventually sort of
seriously limited in 2020, 2021. But
even then, you see Chinese developers
trying to essentially borrow through
pre-sales
from ordinary Chinese households, right?
Which is like, you give me all the money
to build your house up front. I promise
I'll get round to it.
You know, not stating actually I've got
20 other projects that I've got to build
with your money first. There's no escrow
system here.
So yeah, you you do see the Chinese
government sort of waking up to the
problems, but it's like it's like in any
other country, you know, it doesn't have
same sort of western democratic
politics, but
how do you get off the train while it's
moving, right? And and they've tried
with the three red lines and the
campaign against the real estate
development sector in the last 5 years,
and it hasn't gone very well.
You know, something I'm wondering about,
you always hear about the CCP trying to
learn the lessons of the collapse of the
Soviet Union, and they don't want to
have that fate, and so they're very
obsessed with this question of what
brought the Soviet Union down. Do they
spend much time looking at the collapse
of the Japanese real estate bubble and
the effect that that had on Japan as an
industrial dynamo? It's a great
question. Uh
you know, I'm not in I'm not in direct
touch on a day-to-day basis. My
understanding was that they that they
did, that this was a preoccupation of
the Chinese leadership. I used to hear
it a lot from people close to economic
and financial policy making that this
was a serious consideration, and it was
why they didn't want to pop the bubble,
>> Yeah. which is essentially what the
Japanese government and the Bank of
Japan did
at the very end of the 1980s, early
1990s. Um they seem to have done that
anyway. I mean, it is a fascinating
thing. There's always this discussion
of, you know, an autocratic regime can
can think in really long-term, you know,
they think in decades and centuries.
>> in this case, it was, you know, there
was a land financing model that China's
local governments had, which has been
pulled out from under them.
There was an asset class that Chinese
households could invest in, which has
been pulled out from under them. The
government hasn't replaced those two
things with anything particularly good.
Hm. Uh we certainly know that they look
at it now, right? Cuz we had Richard Koo
on the podcast a couple of times, and we
know that deflationary spiral caused by
real estate collapse is kind of a topic
du jour over there. Talk more about the
three red lines, cuz this is something I
remember they came out when we were both
in Hong Kong,
and you could see why policymakers were
doing it. And to some extent, you know,
okay, house prices came down, and
there's less new builds and things like
that nowadays,
but they also seem to kind of flub them,
right?
>> Yeah. Totally. Um so the three red lines
were basically the Chinese government
identifies the the real estate
developers as the tool through which
they're going to cool the housing market
down. And they come out with the three
red lines, which are three different
metrics of, you know,
uh debt to cash and and other sort of
debt metrics, and they basically say, if
you violate
uh one or two of these, you can maybe
keep borrowing only to refinance old
debt. If you're green on all of the
three red lines, you're fine, right? If
your metrics are okay, keep borrowing,
go for it. But none of them are at this
point. Um and if you have three red
scores on the red lines, basically, if
you're violating all of these, no
borrowing even to refinance, right?
You've got to pay down debt. Now, these
companies are some of the most insanely
structured financial vehicles in
history, right? They can only expand
through extremely rapid debt-driven
growth, right? The model is such, you
know, if you're Evergrande and you're
paying like a 15%
interest on on your borrowing, you've
got to keep borrowing to expand, right?
Um it's not a good idea, but you've got
nothing else. Right. Um so
>> thing about Evergrande also is the
diversification into a bunch of other
things. I remember, again, in Hong Kong
asking someone like, we should do a
graphic of China Evergrande's all all
their different businesses, right? Cuz
it would be really interesting. And it
took like 3 weeks to make. And when it
came out, it was almost unreadable
because there were just so many of them
like splayed out.
>> You know what it sounds like? WeWork.
Which had I mean, that was a company
that had diversified into literal wave
wave pool business.
>> [laughter]
>> Um and about a hundred other things. So
also just an insanely complicated,
leveraged organization that was a
multi-billion dollar unicorn, and now is
worth the bag of Fritos.
>> We mocked when they they bought
Faraday Futures, the US EV company. And
we all mocked, right? Evergrande saying,
what are they going to do
Well, honestly, now I'm like I'm like,
maybe if they the three red lines hadn't
come in, we'd be like seeing them
driving around in them.
>> Carsonization of Chinese companies,
where on a long enough timeline, they're
all becoming EV companies. Like I There
was a great article in the Bloomberg in
Bloomberg today about earlier this week
about multiple vacuum cleaner companies
in China that are now releasing EVs. So
I guess I'm excited.
>> Their their argument was always like,
you know, where do you put your car in
the car park in the estate that you live
in? Who built that? That's your vertical
integration. [laughter]
Yeah. Yeah, they believed in it. But ba-
basically, yeah, they they bring the
three red lines in. Um the the real
estate development sector begins
contracting very rapidly. The most
indebted companies get into trouble
almost immediately. But also, some of
the companies that people thought were
pretty safe that borrowed at pretty low
rates um are are getting into trouble
fairly quickly as well. You have sort of
Country Gardens, China Vanke, like they
they're all getting into trouble quite
quickly. Um what The way I think of it
is that basically they the Chinese
government attacked the the sector that
had grown up to intermediate between the
households and the local governments,
but they didn't change anything about
the incentives for the households or
local governments. The household still
needs to invest. The local government
still need money from somewhere. And
these companies were just making that
arrangement work for those two sides. I
see. And destroying them does nothing
really. You know, it causes a lot of
distress, construction activity drops,
lots of people aren't going to get the
the homes they invested in in through
the pre-sale system, but it doesn't
really address the actual core driving
forces. Talk a little bit more about um
the local government finances and what
it is about land that is particularly
important for cuz there are other ways
the local governments could
theoretically taxes, all that stuff,
etc. I was never sure what the driving
if the driving force was at the sort of
Beijing national level or if it was the
local governments that, you know, first
started doing this cuz they're like, oh,
here's a way to make money and develop
and look good in Beijing's eyes, and
then Beijing just kind of went with it.
So, I would trace it back largely to, as
I said before, you know, people started
experimenting with land auctions, land
sales from 1987. It starts to get more
popular in the the early '90s, but it's
when they change the tax and spending
system, uh the distribution of spending
and tax responsibilities between the
Chinese central and local governments
that really sort of hammers it home. So,
traditionally, China People's Republic
quite decentralized in terms of revenue
and spending obligations. Um local
governments did most of the tax raising,
they did most of the spending. The
central government told them there were
certain things they had to do, but they
did it all fairly uh independently. And
then, 1994, they switched the system and
the central government says, "You you
can raise a revenue, but we'll take most
of that."
>> Right. "We'll tell you how much you get
back of that." It became a much more
centralized system. And overnight, the
local governments were left with huge
spending responsibilities. That those
don't change, but only making sort of 60
or 70% of the money that they needed to
fund them. They stumble through the
1990s trying to find ways of doing this.
There's lots of sort of flagrantly
illegal um administrative fees and fines
placed on things. This actually gets
them in trouble because it's very
politically sensitive, you know, there's
uh rural uh Chinese residents being
absolutely rinsed for anything the local
governments can get their hands on. And
they land on on on land, basically. They
they see the the land auctions, which
are off-balance sheet revenues. They do
not count for the purposes of being
remitted to Beijing in the same way that
normal tax revenues do. And they say,
"Right, okay, that's it. That's what
we'll do. That's how I will raise
money." And you see the proportion of
income rise and rise and rise very
aggressively through the late 1990s from
a pretty sort of residual amount that
was useful for it was useful for land
allocation. It wasn't mostly useful at
the beginning for raising money, and it
becomes the main fundraising tool. And
then they're in the trap. Yeah. The land
trap.
Is Has any country ever successfully
gotten out of this type of situation?
It depends what you mean by success.
>> Yeah. Depends what you mean by it. Well,
without a massive collapse or without a
period of very long stagnation, which
seems to be what China is in now. I
would say basically no. Um I would say
basically no. And funnily enough, I
actually think one of the best cases for
relatively rapid like return to normalcy
is after 2008 in the US specifically. W-
You can tell how few cases there are
that I'm using
the the Great Recession. This is the
best one. It's like, this might be the
best outcome. Um
for a number of different reasons, but
yeah, that might be the best outcome.
There are places that didn't get into
the trap in the first place, but yeah.
>> That that seems to be the ideal,
probably. I've obviously uh never been
to mainland China. All of the China news
that I consume is on propaganda that
makes it onto my Instagram Reels that
shows all these incredible futuristic
cities and robots doing everything.
Again, 100% of my China news consumption
makes it look like paradise on Earth. Is
it actually uh Again, because I only
consume propaganda, is it actually
stagnating? I I will say I I can't uh
claim to have [clears throat] been to
mainland China for for years now. Um I I
think I think it is. I think the
long-term threat from undermining what
was
really right at the middle of the
Chinese development model for a very
long time and not replacing it with
anything has been really dangerous.
You've seen this effort as investment in
the real estate sector has dropped and
dropped and dropped to drive it into the
manufacturing sector. But the real the
reality is that the manufacturing
sector, as big as it is in China, isn't
big enough to productively absorb all of
this.
>> This is the This is the question. Like,
can the US can the Chinese manufacturing
sector just be so dominant that it just
offsets the decline of real estate? And
your analysis is no.
>> Uh my analysis is no. Chinese economy is
too big. I would say. I would say that
and and too big means that the domestic
real estate market is absolutely
gargantuan, right? The thing you're
trying to replace is enormous. And
there's only so many buyers for your
products in the rest of the world. And
this is why you see, I think, the
anti-involution campaigns and the sort
of
>> to get consumption up.
>> Exactly. The the pressure against it
because the the the sort of
consequences, the negative consequences,
already starting to display themselves.
And we're really like 3 years into this
really big push to drive the investment
into manufacturing. Um and it's showing
those problems in a way that it took
real estate much longer. I I don't think
it can be a like-for-like replacement.
Wait, talk more about real estate and
productivity cuz this is something that
I didn't really internalize until I read
the chapter in your book, the China
chapter. Yes. So, there is a lot of
really really interesting research about
real estate in China and what it's done
to productivity. So, if you think about
it from the perspective of
we're going to get into a banking
argument that's already get that's going
to get me in trouble as well in terms of
like the uh you know, the amount of
credit you can have. But if you think
there's any constraint on the amount of
credit, which obviously in in China
there is, there are actual like targets
and and limits. It's still a fairly
state-oriented system in lots of
different ways. Then, the resources
going to one part of the economy means
they aren't going to another part of the
economy. And in China's case, this means
employment, it means material
investment, it means, you know, steel
and concrete and copper and everything
else.
The real estate sector in general, in
the long run, I think, has pretty low
productivity, right? You you can build
constructively in in places where, you
know, housing's really in demand, but
there's only so much you can get out of
it. And certainly
>> making new stuff.
>> No, totally. And certainly in China,
what has happened and what was certainly
happening during the the run-up to the
the three red lines policy, is you saw a
lot of productive, entrepreneurial, and
innovative activity instead going into
real estate. We talk about Chinese real
estate developers having lots of arms.
Every big Chinese company was trying to
run a real estate company on the side
during the 2010s, right? Cuz there's so
much money to be made. Why not?
[clears throat] Why not do that as well?
And uh there's really interesting
research from Yu Xie at the IMF talking
about how individual uh Chinese um
entrepreneurs would go into real estate
over time because there's so much money
to be made. Um and it and it is
productivity destroying, especially if I
think you're in a state-oriented
financial system where you're not
probably going to see like a 2008-style
crash. Yeah. This is where you see the
consequences come through.
>> Ah, that's interesting. You know, I
remember I I think about that line in
The Sopranos where AJ tells his son,
he's like, "Buy real estate. They're not
making any more of it."
Whether China else It's not really true.
Like, A, artificial islands exist. B, uh
again, in the Chinese
>> Artificial islands literally a drop in
the ocean.
Yeah, they start Well, you [laughter]
got to start somewhere. But more
importantly, um
again, if the uh my mainland consumption
of Chinese propaganda, I always see
these things like, "This used to be a
desert. Now it's this beautiful like
farmable land and there is greenery
here." Can't like, whether it's China or
elsewhere, the history of land, like,
it's not really that fixed. They're
always find new ways to sort of
uh create habitable land. That's That's
what it means to be human. I I think
there's there's two things that One is
like actual reclamation, which is like,
we've probably added like a
>> Can you By the way, I think that's the
most powerful word in the English
language, reclamation, cuz it's like it
means turning watery land into land. But
the implication is like, we are
reclaiming it. We are reclaiming what
used to be ours. I think that's such a
powerful word, reclamation.
>> like Francis Bacon sort of thing. It's
very like, you know, man's dominion over
the
>> Yeah, it's like we we this land that we
can't live in was only a we were
temporarily embarrassed on native land
by the way.
>> grand scheme, it's always good to do
land reclamation where you can, but
there's really not very much of it.
>> Okay. I think that the more interesting
way that you can create more land, in
the way that I think of it, is is more
like if you think of land as a like a
commuter a commutable reachable area,
then we've always been able to create
more land, right? It's like the Bronx
wasn't useful land uh 150 years ago, and
now it's extraordinarily expensive land
because you can get into the productive
center of Yeah. Right. Right. Um and
that's actually one thing that uh
loosens the the sort of trap conditions
around land over time. You see this in
the US like during the early 20th
century, you saw New York for example
loosen a lot of its problems with
housing and real estate because suddenly
it was like these the outer boroughs you
could populate full of people and they
could work in Manhattan still and that
was fine. And that was a bit like
creating multiple New Yorks worth of
land to attach to.
>> Oh, here's where we can talk about the
hukou system cuz that ended up being
precisely a limiting force on this
dynamic. Yeah, absolutely. And I think
that that feeds into the whole question
of the Chinese welfare system and the
fact that
Chinese households are driven to invest
so aggressively in land, right? If your
welfare is linked completely to the
place where you grew up and you become
a migrant worker and you go and work
somewhere else, then you're going to
want to invest very aggressively either
in real estate where you can in the
place you moved to or in real estate at
home. It's essentially like a sort of
savings technique more than it is again
in China it feels like the land use and
the land as an asset are more divorced
from one another than anywhere else. You
can see this in the rental yield data,
right? Rental yields in China rents in
China aren't expensive even even in you
know the the really popular cities
they're not expensive at all. Um, so
that that sort of gap and the hukou
system really feeds into this by
essentially it's another force driving
Chinese households to invest more and
more and more. Sorry, I don't totally
understand. Explain a little further.
What is the essence of the system? What
are the constraints at play and then
clarify like how it how that the
incentives therefore are to acquire
land? Got it. So the the essence of the
system basically is that you have a
welfare system that is linked to the
place where you're registered as a
household which is usually the place
where [clears throat] you grew up. Okay.
Right? So you're able to get all sorts
of different ordinary welfare state
things
based there only and if you move for
work, it doesn't matter, right? So
you're not eligible if you're a migrant
worker to all of those things in in
Shanghai for example and these things
are really really
>> can move there.
>> move there and people want you to move
there. But you really be a sort of
literally a second class citizen. Yeah,
absolutely. So this is without huge
amounts of external migration or with
almost no external migration really
China has been able to create the system
that lots of other parts of the world
have with very sort of
you know poorly paid migrant workers
turning up who don't have any rights in
the place they're moving to. These are
the people doing the construction jobs,
they're people doing a lot of the
low-paid work. I don't know if this
still happens but I remember in the
2000s if you early 2000s if you walked
around Beijing at night and looked in
the windows of some of the restaurants
the waiters would be sleeping on the
table cuz most of them came in from the
farmland didn't have access to housing
so kind of crazy. Yeah. Yeah. It's
interesting one of those things
uh people who are sort of more on the
immigration restrictionist end in the US
will often say things like you know what
the US has actually fallen behind on
productivity because we have this
endless supply of cheap labor with
diminished rights. Had we not had that
that would have forced US firms to do
more capital deepening maybe invest in
robots etc. It's interesting because we
think of China as a very
advanced industrial nation and yet I
don't know it makes me your description
of that makes me think that story
doesn't really hold water.
>> Totally and I I understand why people
concentrate on that element of the
Chinese economy. It's like the most
exciting interesting bit and it you
don't need to downplay in any way the
advanced manufacturing and the sort of
hyper futuristic elements of it to say
that that doesn't represent the
overwhelming share even Chinese
industry, right? Which is relatively low
productivity relatively low return it's
at scale but it's not enormously like
futuristic and certainly once you get
out of the manufacturing industry, you
are going into the the standard East
Asian development model where the
service industry's productivity is
absolutely awful, right? Really really
poor service productivity. So yeah, I I
think it's a the two things are true at
once, right? It's it's large and it
contains multitudes but it's
but it's not most of the story to me. Do
you see any signs that Chinese people
are starting to I guess move into other
assets like equities probably not bonds
but we know the government has been
trying to stimulate the entire economy
and I think they've been pretty clear
they've been trying to lift various
asset prices not housing. Well, now
they're doing housing as well actually
but do you see any signs that people are
starting to change their minds on
something like Chinese equities? I think
to make the Chinese equity market really
work, you would have to make a series of
deep political decisions about the way
China's run that I think they probably
won't make which is basically things
like Jack Ma when he got really slapped
down.
>> Yeah.
Basically you need to allow that sort of
behavior, right? You need to allow the
innovation, you need to allow the
entrepreneurs to sort of go nuts. You
can't have all of these restrictions
around we don't want the young people
playing video games and we want it to be
driven into this kind of robotics and
not that kind and all of those sort of
limitations are going to I would say
prevent that from happening. There's too
much political activity that a Chinese
company has to do.
>> What about just like the hyper
competitiveness? I mean people will say
well, there's hundreds of EV companies
in China. Most of them are going to fail
and yet you read about new launches.
I don't know like this I love this story
like this is one of those stories that I
really like because it feeds all my
biases so therefore I'm sort of very
skeptical of it but I probably repeat it
it's like oh like China's stock market
hasn't done well cuz they're too good at
capitalism cuz it's too competitive cuz
they really get it and they're really
competing it's driven all this abundance
and so forth. Like is there something to
that that like the reason Chinese
equities haven't done well is because
with such intense competition with the
provinces all having their national
champions that none can really sort of
capture something that might reflect
sort of monopoly rents. I think there's
definitely something to that in a way. I
think that when when I think about that
I would say it's true when you're
subsidizing the competition. It's not
true competition in general. It doesn't
seem it seems crazy to me to say like
net bad if everyone's getting like cheap
inputs and there's lots of competition.
But the provinces still do have a role
in subsidizing either implicitly or
directly in subsidizing their national
champions and when she says yeah that we
want to make spark plugs a big priority
for the next five years they all go they
still do that, right? They scramble to
find their local spark plug maker.
>> and I think I think there's lots of like
American examples and examples elsewhere
in sectors where people said oh it's too
competitive and no one will ever achieve
it. Uber's a good example.
People said this would never work. It
does work, right? So there is a scale
that you can build where I think you
develop a value even in a market with
that's really competitive and really
sort of low entry cost but you won't do
that if every other imagine a world with
Uber but where every other ride share
company was aggressively subsidized
every time Uber got above a certain
market cap. Then yeah, you wouldn't have
Uber at a certain market cap.
I'm really curious cuz again the book
goes through it's not just China. It
goes through all sorts of land models
but what was the most interesting one
that that you looked at?
Not only does it go across different
ways that different countries treat land
across the world. It also goes across
time like 3,000 years worth of human
history.
>> Yeah, I should emphasize to anyone
listening it's like the the I was really
interested in the China stuff but it's
not a not a China book.
The two most interesting to me one of
which because I I live there and I think
it's the most unusual and fascinating
real estate system in the world is is
Singapore
which has defied in many ways a lot of
the limitations that other countries
have seen. And
the one of the first parts of the book
which is like colonial America where
there were all of these efforts to
turn land into money, right? These
colonists get to a place where they have
essentially to them infinity land. It
just keeps going on and on. They don't
know where it stops. It seems to be
relatively fertile and good more people
turn up and but have shortages in cash
and labor and everything else and
there's all of these efforts to turn
land into money with public and private
land banking projects. I found all of
that like absolutely fascinating. It's
not actually something I knew very well
before starting to research the book.
Yeah, so Singapore and colonial America.
>> we have a few minutes left. What is it
about Singapore that makes it I actually
I don't know why I sort of assumed they
did the same 99 year land lease and
that's similar.
>> is the most interesting thing. They
start off with all the inherited things
that Hong Kong starts off with. Up until
the middle of the 20th century, the
cities are run on very very similar
lines. Hong Kong goes off in one
direction and Singapore goes off in
another and the Singaporean direction is
basically how do you maximize home
ownership? Right?
Permanently. How do you have a
sustainable model for making sure people
can still afford to come in? So what
they have is this bizarre public private
system. I say bizarre it's you know it's
very impressive where the government
owns most of the the city's land not all
of it like in Hong Kong but most of it
and they have the Housing and
Development Board that builds housing
estates. They then sell the units in the
housing estates to Singaporean citizens.
You can only own one. You can't own
multiple and rent them out. There are
restrictions on how long you can hold
them before but there's an internal
market you can only sell them to
Singaporean citizens and permanent
residents. The building is done the the
amount of building is done to make sure
that everyone can afford to live
>> really
um
they've really divorced
usage from speculation.
>> Totally. They divorced usage from land
and a place that I think most people
think of as very capitalistic, free
market, low tax has basically decided
this asset class, land and real estate,
this is something different.
Yeah, we're doing a different thing with
this. We're you know, the the normal
forces. Singapore, there's so much
international money, center of like
capital and trade flows, it's rich. They
do have commercial REITs though in
Singapore. They do. They do. I remember
this because when I was in Singapore, I
was saw the ticker symbol on the side of
a few buildings. It's like you can
invest in this. But anyway, yeah. Yeah,
but the
commercial real estate is a little bit
different. But the residential real
estate and they've done this in again,
they decided land was different. They
have a thing called the land acquisition
act, which really allowed them to strip
a lot of people of their land
extraordinarily low prices through the
sort of '60s, '70s, '80s.
And it's allowed them to do something
very, very different. I don't know
whether most countries can sustain the
idea that capitalism works for
everything but not land and we're just
going to be one Singaporean senior
politician described to me it to me as
piracy what they did in the in the '70s
and '80s. You know, pennies on the
dollar, basically demanding people hand
over this land so it could be housing
for Singaporeans, but it has worked very
well.
Okay, so China probably cannot pursue
the Singaporean model at this point,
right? But why can't they institute like
a stronger social safety net so that the
burden of saving for retirement, for
health emergencies, things like that
doesn't always necessarily fall on the
citizens and therefore they have to
invest in highly speculative assets.
Yeah, they should is is the answer.
There seems to be huge political
opposition to doing this at the top of
the Chinese Communist Party and it's
bizarre again because you talk to
someone like Richard Koo and he'll give
you he'll explain why if you don't do
this, this is the consequence, right?
Japan is the consequence, long-term
stagnation. It's going to be really
difficult.
They should do all that
and maybe they will be sort of drummed
into it eventually because I think the
alternative is both stagnation and lots
and lots of trade friction with the
people you're exporting to as we've
already seen.
Right, because it's not just the US, is
it? Everyone's sort of no one there are
like got to be a lot of countries that
are not thrilled by
>> No one's totally happy with it. It's
it's a weird it's a weird mix cuz for
some countries it's like, you know, if
you're not going to make some of these
items, right? If you're a country that's
simply not going to make EVs, then why
should you care about getting the really
cheap EVs? But everyone's got something
to be upset about. In Southeast Asia it
was always steel when I was there.
Everyone wants to have their own local
steel sector and they don't like the
Chinese dumping of steel. In Indonesia,
they don't want like cheap Chinese
you know, direct consumer merchandise
coming in cuz it messes with their small
and medium-sized businesses. I guess for
most of these countries the difficulty
is do you want to pick a fight with the
Chinese government?
It's not an obvious question like it is
in the US. I I guess I just have one
last
question and you know, the sort of
Singapore example is what reminded me
like
land is weird. Like and there there are
even like the idea that you could have a
capitalist system except for residential
land.
A lot of people actually kind of think
that you hear what is
the Georgists, right? And they think
like no land is special and we need to
have these like special taxes on
ownership and yeah, we love free
markets, but again, maybe because
there's only so much land they're not
making much more of it etc. Maybe there
really is something to do. It's sort of
unfair like I get born in the year 1980
and I already a bunch of people already
own the land around me, which doesn't
really seem fair. It's like I was just
born, where's my chance? I have
like we're never going to go to the pure
Singapore model, but are there things
that we could do with the tax system
that would like sort of further hammer
home the idea that residential land is
for living. Yeah, I think there's
there's dozens of different things you
could do, but I mean one of the big
things is that the the legacy of Henry
George and the politicians in municipal
America that really loved Henry George
is that America has relatively high
property taxes anyway. You can do all
sorts of things with property taxes to
lean more of the value on the the land
rather than the structures, right? Lots
of states, lots of cities have done
this. I think it's going to be
increasingly important in the future cuz
what you're going to get is increasingly
people inheriting homes from their
parents when you can't afford them and
then that main store of wealth is about
whether your parents decided to buy in
the right place at the right time. You
can't even I talked to a lot of
70-year-olds who'll be like, well, I
picked I picked my two-bedroom flat in
1973 and yes, I bought it for three and
a half dollars, but but it's mine.
That's going to be a lot less tenable I
think when it's handed down wealth.
So yeah, there's there's loads and loads
of things and you know, Henry George is
in the book, the political consequences
how Georgeism fell apart in there too.
All right, Mike Bird, thank you so much
for coming on Odd Lots. Congrats on the
book. Thank you very much for having me.
>> Yeah, that was amazing. Thank you so
much.
>> so good. Joe, that was really great and
I genuinely the book is great. Yeah, I
love talking to Mike. Once again, I'm
just like hasn't he been like on the
internet as much as we have? How do you
how did you write a book in this time?
>> I've no idea.
>> understand how anyone writes a book,
especially a very serious book on a very
big meaty topic, but I just write like
>> constantly? While tweeting. He tweets a
lot. Speaking of property
>> Yeah, it's like it would be like if you
were never online. He's online as much
as I am. Um okay, you know you you asked
that question about whether or not
Chinese cities are actually futuristic.
>> Yeah.
I have an anecdote on this point. I
think I might have said it before, but
China is the place where I went to both
the most impressive bathroom ever in
like a highly futuristic luxury shopping
mall in Beijing and also the worst one
ever in my entire life, which was in a
rural a rural village
>> it in detail.
>> won't, but it was basically a hole in
the ground, right? It was terrible.
China, it's a land of contradictions.
>> [laughter]
>> Thank you. Thank you for highlighting
the cliché.
Um no, I thought like it did it always
did seem very interesting it still does
that like there are so much speculation
that happens in China and I always found
that to be a little weird. I also just
find the idea of like buying a property,
but it's actually really you're not
buying it, you're only buying the
property for like 75 years to be a
little weird. But on the other hand
>> That kind of exists in New York.
>> Yeah, yeah and in the US like look, we
pay property taxes in perpetuity, which
means to some extent that when you own
something, you are paying a permanent
rent to use it and if you stop paying
that rent, then you could theoretically
lose it. So maybe it's less weird than I
thought. It is actually we should do
more on Singapore specifically like a
But also, you know, like I'm not sure to
your point in the very beginning whether
people actually want the divorce between
usage and speculation. I just think that
for
several of the last decades, people
didn't have to choose. You got to live
in it and you made a lot of money. I
think it's very hard to get off the
train once it's kind of rolling, right?
And that's the problem that we're seeing
in China and now they're trying to walk
this very fine tightrope where it's like
we don't want to make everyone
incredibly poor,
but we also want to depress housing and
the importance of housing in our economy
in order to boost manufacturing and
productivity. This is why again, my
proposal, affordable housing for one
year only
>> [laughter]
>> and then it goes back to being really
expensive. All right, well, you can
suggest that, Joe. Yeah,
I'll run on that. I'll run on that I'll
run on that platform. All right, shall
we leave it there?
>> Yeah. All right, this has been another
episode of the Odd Lots podcast. I'm
Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
TracyAlloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at The Stalwart. And
for more Odd Lots content, please check
out our daily newsletter that is over at
bloomberg.com/odd
lots. And we also have a Discord where
you can chat about all these topics 24/7
with fellow listeners. That's
discord.gg/odd
lots. And if you enjoyed the
conversation, then please like or leave
a comment or better yet, subscribe.
Thanks for listening.